[SYCL][DOC] Add Extension for FPGA task_sequence (#6348)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_intel_fpga_task_sequence.asciidoc

Reviewer: Johnny if you're picking this up to finish it off, feel free to add yourself to the author list.

Reviewer 2: added

:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en

:blank: pass:[ +]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

[float]

== Contributors

// spell-checker: disable
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Robert Ho, Intel +
Tommy Hoffner, Intel +
Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel +
Michael Kinsner, Intel +
// spell-checker: enable

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2021 Intel Corporation

Intel Confidential

== Status

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software products.

== Version

Built On: {docdate} +
Revision: C

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, revision 3.

> 

Reviewer: Add the properties extension as a dependence.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for use in device code. It provides the class +task_sequence+, which is an abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be executed asynchronously from the caller, and with which a clear mapping to spatial hardware instances can be reasoned about when developing applications.

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace intel {
namespace experimental {

template<auto& f>
struct task_sequence{};

template <typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...),

>           typename propertyListT = property_list<>>

Reviewer: The latest version is called "properties" instead of "property_list".  Please update the name and the "task_sequence Properties" section to conform with the latest version of the extension.

Author: Updated.

> class task_sequence<f, property_list> {

Author: Fixed

  typedef ReturnT (*f_t)(ArgsT...);

public:
  task_sequence(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence(task_sequence &&) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(task_sequence &&) = delete;

  task_sequence();

  task_sequence(const propertyListT &);

  void async(ArgsT... args);

  ReturnT get();

  ~task_sequence();

> };

Author: Added

----
ReturnT get();
----
|
Synchronously retrieves the result of an `async` call. 

Results are retrieved in FIFO order of their `async` invocations. 

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
~task_sequence();
----
|
Destructor for `task_sequence`. 

Implicitly invokes `get` on all outstanding invocations launched through `async` unless this `task_sequence` object was instantiated with the `balanced` property defined below.
|===

=== `task_sequence` Scoping

To allow compilers targeting spatial compute architectures to efficiently reuse hardware, `task_sequence` objects must not have their lifetime extended beyond the scope in which they are declared, and it is undefined behavior if lifetime is otherwise extended. Both move and copy constructors for `task_sequence` are therefore deleted. Additionally, `task_sequence` objects should retire all outstanding `async` invocations before exiting scope - this is performed by the `task_sequence` destructor unless the `balanced` property was specified in which case it is the programmer's responsibility to ensure that `get` has been called for all invocations launched using `async`, before the lifetime of the `task_sequence` object ends.

> In this example implementation, a count of outstanding `async` invocations is kept by incrementing a private counter upon each `async`, and decrementing upon each `get`. The destructor calls `get` on all `outstanding` `async` invocations remaining, ensuring that no `async` invocations execute beyond the object's lifetime. 

Reviewer: What example?  Perhaps you mean "for example".

> In this example implementation, a count of outstanding `async` invocations is kept by incrementing a private counter upon each `async`, and decrementing upon each `get`. The destructor calls `get` on all `outstanding` `async` invocations remaining, ensuring that no `async` invocations execute beyond the object's lifetime. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example implementation below, a count of outstanding `async` invocations is kept by incrementing a private counter upon each `async`, and decrementing upon each `get`. The destructor calls `get` on all `outstanding` `async` invocations remaining, ensuring that no `async` invocations execute beyond the object's lifetime. 
```

> Although retiring outstanding `async` s in the destructor is necessary to ensure that `async` s do not outlive their `task_sequence`, it is expected that many common coding patterns will guarantee that the number of `async` and `get` calls match (are balanced) before a `task_sequence` object is destroyed, meaning that a simple destructor will be sufficient in these cases. To provide more information to the compiler and to relax the requirement for `async` to be invoked implicitly in the `task_sequence` destructor, the property `balanced` may be specified on a `task_sequence` object, which guarantees that a user will not allow a destructor on that `task_sequence` object to be called when there are outstanding `async` invocations that have not been balanced by a matching `get` call. In the presence of this property, potentially expensive hardware implementing the destructor may be elided. It is undefined behavior to specify the `balanced` property on `task_sequence` and then to allow the `task_sequence` object to be destroyed while there are any `async` invocations for which `get` has not been called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although retiring outstanding `async` s in the destructor is necessary to ensure that `async` s do not outlive their `task_sequence`, it is expected that many common coding patterns will guarantee that the number of `async` and `get` calls match (are balanced) before a `task_sequence` object is destroyed, meaning that a simple destructor will be sufficient in these cases. To provide more information to the compiler and to relax the requirement for `get` to be invoked implicitly in the `task_sequence` destructor, the property `balanced` may be specified on a `task_sequence` object, which guarantees that a user will not allow a destructor on that `task_sequence` object to be called when there are outstanding `async` invocations that have not been balanced by a matching `get` call. In the presence of this property, potentially expensive hardware implementing the destructor may be elided. It is undefined behavior to specify the `balanced` property on `task_sequence` and then to allow the `task_sequence` object to be destroyed while there are any `async` invocations for which `get` has not been called.
```

};

struct response_capacity {
  template <uint32_t Size>
  using value_t = property_value<response_capacity, std::integral_constant<uint32_t, Size>>;
};

inline constexpr balanced::value_t balanced_v;

template <uint32_t Size>
inline constexpr invocation_capacity::value_t<Size> invocation_capacity_v;

template <uint32_t Size>
inline constexpr response_capacity::value_t<Size> response_capacity_v;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence` destructor is invoked). 

| invocation_capacity | The `invocation_capacity` property defines the minimum required number `Size` of `async` invocations that must be invokable without any `get` being called on that same set.  This number of `async` invocations without a `get` call is the minimum number that will be supported before the `async` member function blocks.

> | response_capacity | The `response_capacity` property tells the compiler the required simultaneous capacity `Size` of get calls. The compiler must guarantee storage capacity for results of up to `Size` `async` calls.

Reviewer: Can you rephrase this to be user-centric like the definition of invocation capacity rather than compiler-centric?

E.g. with a response capacity of X the user can be sure up to X outstanding calls can make progress but if there are more than X the X+1th may block until at least one more get() is called.

Reviewer 3: Updated. Please take a look.

Tasks belonging to different `task_sequence` objects provide a http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee] with respect to each other. That is, tasks belonging to different `task_sequence` objects are guaranteed to make forward progress with respect to each other once they have been initiated.

Tasks belonging to a `task_sequence` object provide a http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee] with respect to their caller. That is, a `task_sequence`'s tasks are guaranteed to make forward progress with respect to their caller (that invoked `async`).

When invoked through any call(s) to `async`, callable `f` behaves as if it is a SYCL kernel invoked via `single_task` in execution and memory model terminology.  One consequence of this is that a global memory synchronization point exists on invocation completion equivalently to kernel completion.

> == `task_sequence` Example Implementation 

Reviewer: While useful for the implementation teams, I think we can remove this from the specification.

Reviewer 3: Removed.

= sycl_ext_intel_fpga_task_sequence
:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en

:blank: pass:[ +]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

[float]

> == Contributors

Reviewer 3: Updated.

// spell-checker: disable
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Robert Ho, Intel +
Tommy Hoffner, Intel +
Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel +
Michael Kinsner, Intel +
// spell-checker: enable

== Notice

> Copyright (c) 2021 Intel Corporation

Reviewer 3: Updated.

Intel Confidential

== Status

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software products.

== Version

Built On: {docdate} +
Revision: C

== Dependencies

> This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, revision 3.

Reviewer 3: Updated.

It depends on the link:./sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties] extension.

== Overview

Although SYCL supports task-level parallelism through device kernels, there is no specific mechanism to express parallelism at a sub-kernel level or to invoke additional kernels without involving the host program. In OpenCL 2.0 and beyond, kernel invocations can be initiated without host program interaction through device side enqueue. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to spatial instances in the hardware.

> Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for use in device code. It provides the class +task_sequence+, which is an abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be executed asynchronously from the caller, and with which a clear mapping to spatial hardware instances can be reasoned about when developing applications.

Reviewer 3: Updated and added a note to use the short form 'task_sequence' in the rest of the doc.

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace intel {
namespace experimental {

template<auto& f, class propertiesT = decltype(oneapi::experimental::properties{})>
struct task_sequence{};

template <typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...),
          class propertiesT>
class task_sequence<f, propertiesT> {

public:
  task_sequence(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence(task_sequence &&) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(task_sequence &&) = delete;

  task_sequence();

  task_sequence(const propertiesT &);

  void async(ArgsT... args);

  ReturnT get();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr bool has_property();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr auto get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
};

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl

----

> `task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a +Callable+ `f`. The +Callable+ `f` defines the asynchronous task to be associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring an auto reference ensures that each `f` be statically resolvable at compile time.  Static resolvability by the compiler is desirable when compiling for spatial architectures as it can enable the generation of more efficient hardware. Furthermore, the partial specialization `typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...)` ensures that the return type `ReturnT` of `f` and the argument types `typename ... ArgsT` of `f` are resolvable and fixed for each definition of `task_sequence`. 

Reviewer 3: Updated.

The `task_sequence` interface consists of two methods, `async` and `get`. The `async` method asynchronously invokes `f`, and stores the return value into a FIFO queue upon completion of `f`.  The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it returns before the asynchronous `f` invocation completes executing, and potentially before `f` even begins executing (return from the `async` provides no implicit information on the execution status of `f`). The `get` method retrieves the oldest result from this logical FIFO queue, and blocks (waits) until a result is available if none are available immediately upon the call to `get`. Both methods may only be invoked on the device on which a `task_sequence` object has been instantiated. Calling `async` or `get` on a different device results in undefined behavior.

[frame="topbot",options="header"]
|===
|Functions |Description
// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
task_sequence(const propertyListT &);

task_sequence();
----
|
Constructor for `task_sequence`. 

> Accepts properties `balanced`, `invocation_capacity`, and `response_capacity` defined below

Reviewer 3: We do not need to reference every property that this class uses here in the description of the ctor.

Reviewer 3: Removed.

----
ReturnT get();
----
|
Synchronously retrieves the result of an `async` call. 

Results are retrieved in FIFO order of their `async` invocations. 

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
~task_sequence();
----
|
Destructor for `task_sequence`. 

Implicitly invokes `get` on all outstanding invocations launched through `async` unless this `task_sequence` object was instantiated with the `balanced` property defined below.
|===

=== `task_sequence` Scoping

To allow compilers targeting spatial compute architectures to efficiently reuse hardware, `task_sequence` objects must not have their lifetime extended beyond the scope in which they are declared, and it is undefined behavior if lifetime is otherwise extended. Both move and copy constructors for `task_sequence` are therefore deleted. Additionally, `task_sequence` objects should retire all outstanding `async` invocations before exiting scope - this is performed by the `task_sequence` destructor unless the `balanced` property was specified in which case it is the programmer's responsibility to ensure that `get` has been called for all invocations launched using `async`, before the lifetime of the `task_sequence` object ends.

> In this example implementation below, a count of outstanding `async` invocations is kept by incrementing a private counter upon each `async`, and decrementing upon each `get`. The destructor calls `get` on all `outstanding` `async` invocations remaining, ensuring that no `async` invocations execute beyond the object's lifetime. 

Reviewer 3: Updated.

== `task_sequence` Properties

The following code and table describe the "balanced", "invocation_capacity", and "response_capacity" properties that can be provided when declaring a `task_sequence`.

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace intel {
namespace experimental {

> struct balanced {

Reviewer 3: Updated.

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence` destructor is invoked). 

| invocation_capacity | The `invocation_capacity` property defines the minimum required number `Size` of `async` invocations that must be invokable without any `get` being called on that same set.  This number of `async` invocations without a `get` call is the minimum number that will be supported before the `async` member function blocks.

| response_capacity | The `response_capacity` property defines the maximum number `Size` of outstanding `async` invocations such that all outstanding invocations are guaranteed to make forward progress. Further `async` invocations beyond `Size` may block until enough `get` calls are invoked such that the number of outstanding `async` invocations is reduced to `Size`.
|===
--

=== Compatibility with FPGA Kernel Interface Properties

> The Callable `f` defining the asynchronous task associated with a `task_sequence` may be declared with the FPGA Kernel Interface `pipelined` property described in link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Callable `f` defining the asynchronous task associated with a `task_sequence` may be declared with the FPGA Kernel Interface `pipelined` property described in link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]. Normally the property is applicable only on kernels however this extension supports applying the property on task sequences.
```

Reviewer 3: Updated.

> The Callable `f` defining the asynchronous task associated with a `task_sequence` may be declared with the FPGA Kernel Interface `pipelined` property described in link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties].

Reviewer 3: Talked to Rob offline. We agree now that this must be reworded to say that the property is applied on the task_sequence object. Updated.

> 

Reviewer 3: Can you add a section here with simple code samples? Usually the extensions for new classes show how the class will be used.

Reviewer 3: Added a section.

= sycl_ext_intel_fpga_task_sequence
:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Contributors

// spell-checker: disable
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Robert Ho, Intel +
Tommy Hoffner, Intel +
Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel +
Michael Kinsner, Intel +
Abhishek Tiwari, Intel
// spell-checker: enable

> 

Reviewer: Please add a feature test macro

Reviewer 3: Added.

associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring an auto reference ensures
that each `f` be statically resolvable at compile time.  Static resolvability by
the compiler is desirable when compiling for spatial architectures as it can
enable the generation of more efficient hardware. Furthermore, the partial
specialization `typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...)`
helps make it easier to write the class member functions (eg: `get()`).

The `task_sequence` interface consists of two member functions, `async` and
`get`. The `async` function asynchronously invokes `f`, and stores the return
value into a FIFO queue upon completion of `f`. By calling async on a
`task_sequence` more than once, the user implies that the invocations of `f` can
be run in parallel, although the implementation is by no means obligated to do so.  

The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it may return before the
asynchronous `f` invocation completes executing, and potentially before `f` even
begins executing (return from the `async` provides no implicit information on
the execution status of `f`).

The `get` member function retrieves the oldest result from this logical FIFO

> queue, and blocks (waits) until a result is available if none are available

Reviewer: This combined with the sentence above:

> stores the return value into a FIFO queue upon completion of `f`

implies that values are returned in arbitrary order (as the programmer has no guarantee about the order in which the invoked tasks complete) as opposed to the order the task are launched in.  Is this really our intent?  I was under the impression that we'd get() in the same order the user async()ed so that users could reason about which invocation's result they are looking at.

Reviewer: Looking back through our internal materials as we were developing this, the intent was always that the get()s would return results in the same order the tasks were async()ed so I think this is a mistake.

Reviewer 3: Removed this line: "stores the return value into a FIFO queue upon completion of f"
Removed the mention of FIFO in other places in the doc.
Clearly specified that the results are retrieved in the same order as that of the `async` calls.

that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked).

| invocation_capacity | The `async` invocations are guaranteed to not block
as long as the number of outstanding invocations are less than or equal to
`invocation_capacity`. An outstanding invocation is a call to `async` whose
corresponding result has not yet been retrieved by a call to `get`.

| response_capacity | Given a response capacity of `N`, the user is guaranteed
that at least one outstanding `async` call will make progress as long as the
number of outstanding invocations is less than or equal to `N`.
|===
--

=== Compatibility with FPGA Kernel Interface Properties

A `task_sequence` may be declared with the following FPGA Kernel Interface
properties:

 - `pipelined`
 - `use_stall_enable_clusters`

These are described in the link:../sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties] document.

Normally these properties are applicable only to kernels however this extension
supports applying the properties to task sequences.

> == Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model

Reviewer 4: I've had a read through and I have some comments, but I haven't had time to write them up.  I'll do this tomorrow.

C++ standard library:

If a thread offers weakly parallel forward progress guarantee, it does not
guarantee to eventually make progress, regardless of whether other threads make
progress or not. Such threads can still be guaranteed to make progress by
blocking with forward progress guarantee delegation: if a thread P blocks in
this manner on the completion of a set of threads S, then at least one thread in
S will offer a forward progress guarantee that is same or stronger than P. Once
that thread completes, another thread in S will be similarly strengthened. Once
the set is empty, P will unblock.

== Revision History

[cols="5,15,15,70"]
[grid="rows"]
[options="header"]
|========================================
|Rev|Date|Author|Changes
|A|2021-06-11|Robert Ho|*Initial revision*
|B|2021-10-25|Robert Ho|Added async_capacity and get_capacity properties. Added
\__release_task_sequence intrinsic. Altered __create_task_sequence signature.
Added this to all intrinsics.
|C|2022-06-23|Robert Ho|Added compatibility statement with FPGA Kernel Interface
Properties
|D|2023-01-25|Abhishek Tiwari|Format corrections, add examples, add properties
type traits.

> |========================================

Reviewer 3: Updated.

// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Contributors

// spell-checker: disable
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Robert Ho, Intel +
Tommy Hoffner, Intel +
Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel +
Michael Kinsner, Intel +
Abhishek Tiwari, Intel
// spell-checker: enable

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 6 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extension:

* link:./sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]
* link:./sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]

> 

Reviewer: Can you also mention that there's an interaction, but not a dependence on, [sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc)

Reviewer 3: Updated.

Reviewer: This has not yet been addressed.

Reviewer 2: Abhishek has already added this line, you may be looking at an outdated version of the commits.

specification.*

== Backend support status

This extension is currently implemented in `icpx` only for FPGA devices and
only when using either the Level Zero backend or the Intel FPGA OpenCL backend.
Attempting to use this extension in kernels that run on other devices or
backends may result in undefined behavior.  Be aware that the compiler is not
able to issue a diagnostic to warn you if this happens.

== Overview

Although SYCL supports task-level parallelism through device kernels, there is
no specific mechanism to express parallelism at a sub-kernel level or to invoke
additional kernels without involving the host program. In OpenCL 2.0 and beyond,
kernel invocations can be initiated without host program interaction through
the `enqueue_kernel` API. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level
parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial
compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to
spatial instances in the hardware.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for

> use in device code. It provides the class

Reviewer: To make it more readable, can you change the last sentence to:
> It provides the class sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence, which is an abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be executed asynchronously from the caller.  A single object of this class can map naturally to a single hardware instance on spatial targets.

Reviewer 3: Updated.

`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller.  A single object of this class can map
naturally to a single hardware instance on spatial targets.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

=== Examples

> Here's an example that shows how to define and call two task sequences.

Reviewer: This text says that the example shows two task sequences, but the example actually shows four.  Rather than changing this text, though, I think it would be better to simplify the example.

Reviewer 3: Simplified.

    thirdQuarter.async(in.data(), 2*quarterCount, quarterCount);
    fourthQuarter.async(in.data(), 3*quarterCount, quarterCount);
    *out = firstQuarter.get() + secondQuarter.get() +
      thirdQuarter.get() + fourthQuarter.get();
  }).wait();
  ...
}
```

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_INTEL_FPGA_TASK_SEQUENCE` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine
if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the
macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {

template<auto& f, class propertiesT =
   decltype(oneapi::experimental::properties{})>

> class task_sequence{};

Reviewer: Let's make it an compile-time error to match this template instead of the partial one below.  That could be accomplished with a static_assert + a check class like this:

```
template<auto &f>
struct task_sequence_checker : std::false_type {};

template<typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...)>
struct task_sequence_checker<f> : std::true_type {};

template<auto& f, class propertiesT =
   decltype(oneapi::experimental::properties{})>
class task_sequence{
  static_assert(task_sequence_checker<f>::value);
};

Reviewer 3: Added, thank you! :)

Reviewer 2: This was suggested to be removed since it is an implementation detail and not part of the API.

be run in parallel. The implementation is, however, not obligated to run these
invocations in parallel except in so far as is necessary to meet the forward
progress guarantees outlined in the section on Progress Guarantees.

The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it may return before the
asynchronous `f` invocation completes executing, and potentially before `f` even
begins executing (return from the `async` provides no implicit information on
the execution status of `f`).

The `get` member function retrieves results in the same order in which
`async` was invoked. The call blocks if there is no result to retrieve. Both
functions may only be invoked on the device on which a `task_sequence` object
has been instantiated. Calling `async` or `get` on a different device results in
undefined behavior.

[frame="topbot",options="header"]
|===
|Functions |Description
// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
task_sequence(const propertyListT &);

task_sequence();
----
|
Constructor for `task_sequence`.

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
void async(ArgsT... args);
----
|
Asynchronously calls `f` with `args`.

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
ReturnT get();
----
|

> Synchronously retrieves the result of an `async` call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synchronously retrieves the result of a previous `async` call to this `task_sequence` object.
```

Results are retrieved in the order in which the `async` calls were made.

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
~task_sequence();
----
|
Destructor for `task_sequence`.

> Implicitly invokes `get` on all outstanding invocations launched through `async

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implicitly invokes `get` on all outstanding invocations launched through `async`
```

unless this `task_sequence` object was instantiated with the `balanced` property
defined below.
|===

=== `task_sequence` Scoping

`task_sequence` objects should retire all outstanding `async` invocations before

> exiting scope - this is performed by the `task_sequence` destructor unless the

Reviewer: Small suggestions that I think make this more readable:
```suggestion
exiting scope.  This is performed by the `task_sequence` destructor unless the
```

`balanced` property was specified in which case it is the programmer's
responsibility to ensure that `get` has been called for all invocations launched
using `async`, before the lifetime of the `task_sequence` object ends.

> A count of outstanding `async` invocations could be maintained by incrementing a

Reviewer: I think this paragraph is unnecessary.  It's purely an implementation detail and irrelevant to the user.

Reviewer 3: Removed.

private counter upon each `async` call, and decrementing it upon each `get`
call. The destructor can call `get` on all remaining outstanding `async`
invocations, ensuring that no `async` invocations execute beyond the object's
lifetime.

Although retiring outstanding `async` s in the destructor is necessary to ensure
that `async` s do not outlive their `task_sequence`, it is expected that many
common coding patterns will guarantee that the number of `async` and `get` calls
match (are balanced) before a `task_sequence` object is destroyed, meaning that
a simple destructor will be sufficient in these cases. To provide more
information to the compiler and to relax the requirement for `get` to be invoked
implicitly in the `task_sequence` destructor, the property `balanced` may be
specified on a `task_sequence` object, which guarantees that a user will not
allow a destructor on that `task_sequence` object to be called when there are
outstanding `async` invocations that have not been balanced by a matching `get`

> call. In the presence of this property, potentially expensive hardware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call. On spatial architectures, in the presence of this property, potentially expensive hardware
```

implementing the destructor may be elided. It is undefined behavior to specify
the `balanced` property on `task_sequence` and then to allow the `task_sequence`
object to be destroyed while there are any `async` invocations for which `get`
has not been called.

== `task_sequence` Properties

The following code and table describe the properties that can be provided when
declaring a `task_sequence` object.

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {
struct balanced_key {
  using value_t = property_value<balanced_key>;
};

struct invocation_capacity_key {
  template <uint32_t Size>
  using value_t = property_value<invocation_capacity_key,
    std::integral_constant<uint32_t, Size>>;
};

struct response_capacity_key {
  template <uint32_t Size>
  using value_t = property_value<response_capacity_key,
    std::integral_constant<uint32_t, Size>>;
};

inline constexpr balanced_key::value_t balanced;

template <> struct is_property_key<balanced_key> : std::true_type {};

// TODO: Not sure if the template here should just be

> // template<auto &f, class propertiesT>

Reviewer: I think this confusion stems from the fast that an instantiation of the primary template that doesn't match the partial specialization is still well-formed.  I don't think we should allow that.

Reviewer 3: Corrected.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for
use in device code. It provides the class
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller.  A single object of this class can map
naturally to a single hardware instance on spatial targets.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

=== Examples

Here's an example that shows how to define and call two task sequences.

```c++
using namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental;

// Return the sum of elements in 'v', from index 's' to 's+sz'
int vectorSum(float *v, size_t s, size_t sz) {
  ...
}

{
  sycl::queue q{...};

  constexpr int kCount = ...;
  std::vector<float> in(kCount);
  float* out = ...;
  ...

  q.single_task([=] {
    task_sequence<vectorSum> firstHalf;
    task_sequence<vectorSum> secondHalf;
    constexpr int halfCount = kCount/2;
    firstHalf.async(in.data(), 0, halfCount);

>     secondHalf.async(in.data(), halfCount, halfCount);

Reviewer: This example only works if kCount is even.  To fix that but keep it simple, perhaps the third argument could be the last index summed rather than the number of indices summed.  Then this line would be:

```suggestion
    secondHalf.async(in.data(), halfCount+1, kCount-1);
```

Reviewer 2: changed

|===

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {

template<auto &f> struct task_sequence_checker : std::false_type {};

template<typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...)>
struct task_sequence_checker<f> : std::true_type {};

template<auto& f, class propertiesT =
  decltype(oneapi::experimental::properties{})>
class task_sequence{ static_assert(task_sequence_checker<f>::value); };

template <typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...),
          class propertiesT>
class task_sequence<f, propertiesT> {

public:
  task_sequence(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence(task_sequence &&) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(task_sequence &&) = delete;

  task_sequence();

  task_sequence(const propertiesT &);

  void async(ArgsT... args);

  ReturnT get();

  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr bool has_property();

  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr auto get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
};

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext

> } // namespace sycl

Reviewer 5: I think you just want one closing brace here.

Reviewer 2: fixed

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
+Callable+ `f` and by a list of properties `propertiesT`.
The +Callable+ `f` defines the asynchronous task to be
associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring an auto reference ensures
that each `f` is statically resolvable at compile time.  Static resolvability by
the compiler is desirable when compiling for spatial architectures as it can
enable the generation of more efficient hardware. Furthermore, the partial

> specialization:

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense now; it's been incompletely updated after the latest changes.  The partial specialization of task_sequence _itself_ makes it easier to write the member functions, but the snippet below shows the checker.  The checker is used for validation.  

Also, I'm not sure that the checker and the partial specialization should even be shown.  Are they implementation details that should just be described in words?  E.g.: "templating a task_sequence on a non-callable is malformed - diagnostic required".  @gmlueck, what you do think?  How much of the metaprogramming should be explicit in the specification?

Reviewer 5: The synopsis should not show implementation details.  If the checker is not part of the API, then don't show it.  You should describe requirements in words.

Reviewer 2: I've removed the lines in the code block containing the checker

Reviewer: I think we should go further and remove all references to the partial specialization and instead explain any restrictions on valid template parameters in words.

Reviewer 2: I've removed the mention of partial specialization, wondering what you were thinking in addition to the point in the comment chain above as well as the existing paragraph in the doc that is needed here?

Reviewer 2: I've removed the definitions for the partial specialization, and instead described the async, get, and destructor functionality in words using terms based on the Callable definition in the C++ spec.

Reviewer: I think you've swung too far the other way now.  We should specify async and get as they are part of the user API and are therefore not implementation details.  Generally we would put them in the listing and in a table of member functions.  You can look at the section about accessor in the core spec for an example.

supports applying the properties to task sequences.

== Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model

C{plus}{plus} defines a framework for describing the
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress[forward progress] of individual threads
with respect to one another in a multi-threaded program.

Applying this framework to `task_sequence`, `async` tasks belonging to the same
`task_sequence` object provide a http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#11[
weakly parallel forward progress guarantee]. That is, tasks belonging to a
`task_sequence` object are not guaranteed to make forward progress with respect
to each other.

Tasks belonging to different `task_sequence` objects provide a
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee]
with respect to each other. That is, tasks belonging to different
`task_sequence` objects are guaranteed to make forward progress with respect to
each other once they have been initiated.

Tasks belonging to a `task_sequence` object provide a
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee]
with respect to their caller. That is, a task sequence's tasks are guaranteed

> to make forward progress with respect to their caller (that invoked `async`).

Reviewer 4: I think the phrasing "with respect to" is problematic here, because that isn't aligned with my understanding of how C++ defines forward progress.

If tasks have weakly parallel forward progress guarantees, then they have no guarantees.  You can't say that they also have parallel forward progress guarantees.  I think what you've written here says that if you only have one `task_sequence` object, then the tasks in that sequence are never guaranteed to execute until a work-item calls `get()` and blocks upon their result, and an implementation can switch between tasks in the sequence at any time.  But if you have two `task_sequence` objects, once a task starts executing it will continue to do so until it terminates.  I don't think that's what you mean.

I think what you want to say is something closer to:

- Each `task_sequence` is associated with one thread of execution that provides parallel forward progress guarantees.
- Each call to `async` creates a new task, associated with a thread of execution that provides weakly parallel forward progress guarantees.
- The thread associated with the `task_sequence` blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon the tasks in the task sequence.
- When `get()` is called, the calling thread of execution (i.e. work-item) blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon the thread of execution associated with the `task_sequence`.

I still don't think this is exactly right, though, because an implementation still wouldn't be required to ensure any tasks make progress until you call `get()`.  The language about `response_capacity` seems to suggest you want to guarantee some of these tasks will start executing even without a call to `get()`... I'm not 100% sure, but I think you might need a `task_sequence` to be associated with `response_capacity` threads of execution providing concurrent forward progress guarantees in that case.

Reviewer 3: Hey John, thank you for taking the time to write this detailed response. After much discussion and thinking, we have re-written this section. The updates are being discussed on this [SPIRV extension PR](https://github.com/intel-innersource/documentation.xpu.architecture.spirv-extension-drafts/pull/107). Could you please review the new description there?
It will address most of your concerns above if not all. This section about progress guarantees exists in both the SPIRV extension and this SYCL extension. It's just receiving more comments there. Once the review concludes, I'll figure out whether to paste that result here or to link one extension to the other to avoid duplication.

Reviewer 2: I have used the material from the SPIRV extension PR and written up a section about Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model, please take a look!

== Backend support status

*
TODO: Should we have this section for task sequences since they are only
supported on FPGA back ends? Although I am not aware of any 'aspects' being
defined for it. Rest of the text is from the template.
*

_Sometimes an extension can be used only on certain backends. Your
extension document should include this section when this is the case._

_Our preference is to tie the extension to a device aspect when it is
available only on certain backends because it results in a clear error
if the application mistakenly tries to use it on an unsupported backend.
When this is the case, include a paragraph like this:_

The APIs in this extension may be used only on a device that has
`aspect::ext_oneapi_foo`.  The application must check that the device has
this aspect before submitting a kernel using any of the APIs in this
extension.  If the application fails to do this, the implementation throws
a synchronous exception with the `errc::kernel_not_supported` error code
when the kernel is submitted to the queue.

_Occasionally, an extension is limited to certain backends and there is no
related device aspect. When this is the case, include a paragraph like:_

> This extension is currently implemented in {dpcpp} only for GPU devices and

Reviewer 6: Does it work for GPU too?

Reviewer 3: Sorry that is just the text from the template extension. I have a todo above, I will remove this section to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 3: Updated to just say that only FPGA backends are supported. Will add a note about an aspect later.

no specific mechanism to express parallelism at a sub-kernel level or to invoke
additional kernels without involving the host program. In OpenCL 2.0 and beyond,
kernel invocations can be initiated without host program interaction through
device side enqueue. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level
parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial
compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to
spatial instances in the hardware.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for
use in device code. It provides the class
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller, and with which a clear mapping to
spatial hardware instances can be reasoned about when developing applications.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----

> namespace sycl {
> namespace ext {
> namespace intel {
> namespace experimental {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {
```

template<auto& f, class propertiesT =
   decltype(oneapi::experimental::properties{})>
class task_sequence{};

template <typename ReturnT, typename... ArgsT, ReturnT (&f)(ArgsT...),
          class propertiesT>
class task_sequence<f, propertiesT> {

public:
  task_sequence(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence(task_sequence &&) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(task_sequence &&) = delete;

  task_sequence();

  task_sequence(const propertiesT &);

>   void async(ArgsT... args);

Reviewer 6: Do not use a pre-C++11 syntax. `std::thread` and `std::async` have this because it was designed before C++11 and the lambdas... I guess we do not want this technical debt in 2023.
What about a syntax taking only a lambda in your system?
This would avoid passing a function reference?
How to use your system with a lambda?
But at the end, give me a compelling example. :-)

Reviewer 3: We did consider using lambdas. However we discarded it for reasons related to determining static resolvability of the function.

  ReturnT get();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr bool has_property();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr auto get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
};

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
+Callable+ `f` and by a list of properties `propertiesT`.
The +Callable+ `f` defines the asynchronous task to be
associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring an auto reference ensures
that each `f` be statically resolvable at compile time.  Static resolvability by
the compiler is desirable when compiling for spatial architectures as it can
enable the generation of more efficient hardware. Furthermore, the partial
specialization `typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...)`
ensures that the return type `ReturnT` of `f` and the argument types
`typename ... ArgsT` of `f` are resolvable and fixed for each definition of
`task_sequence`. 

> The `task_sequence` interface consists of two methods, `async` and `get`. The

Reviewer 7: Can we make sure the following is clearly stated in the spec?/

By calling async on a task_sequence more than once, the user implies that the invocations of f can be run in parallel.

Reviewer 6: By the way, in C++, the term *member function* is used instead of *method*.

Reviewer 3: Updated both, thanks :)

the `enqueue_kernel` API. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level
parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial
compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to
spatial instances in the hardware.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for
use in device code. It provides the class
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller. A single object of this class can map
naturally to a single hardware instance on spatial targets.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

=== Examples

Here's an example that shows how to define and call two task sequences.

```c++
using namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental;

// Return the sum of elements in 'v', from index 's' to 's+sz'
int vectorSum(float *v, size_t s, size_t sz) {
  ...
}

{
  sycl::queue q{...};

  constexpr int kCount = ...;

>   std::vector<float> in(kCount);

Reviewer: At least in our implementation std::vector is not device_copyable so this won't work.

Reviewer 2: changed to usm pointers with malloc_host

|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

== Definitions

== `task_sequence` class

[source,c++,linenums]
----
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {

template <auto &f, class propertiesT>
class task_sequence;

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
+Callable+ `f` and by a list of properties `propertiesT`. The +Callable+ `f`
defines the asynchronous task to be associated with the `task_sequence`, and
requiring an auto reference ensures that each `f` is statically resolvable at
compile time. Static resolvability by the compiler is desirable when compiling
for spatial architectures as it can enable the generation of more efficient
hardware. Templating a task_sequence on a non-Callable is malformed.

The `task_sequence` interface consists of two member functions, `async` and
`get`. The `async` member function, when called with a suitable list of
arguments matching `f's` list of argument types `ArgTypes`, asynchronously
invokes the `task_sequence` object's associated +Callable+ `f` with those

> arguments. By calling `async` on a `task_sequence` object more than once, the

Reviewer: This definition of async is too permissive.  It makes it sound like the behaviour is arbitrary if async is called with arguments that don't match "f"'s arguments.  That case is malformed.

Reviewer 2: Moved to table and reworded

user implies that those invocations of `f` can be run in parallel. The
implementation is, however, not obligated to run the invocations in parallel
except in so far as is necessary to meet the forward progress guarantees
outlined in the section on Progress Guarantees.

The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it may return before the
asynchronous `f` invocation completes executing, and potentially before `f` even
begins executing (return from the `async` provides no implicit information on
the execution status of `f`).

The `get` member function, when called, retrieves a return value of type `R`,
which is the same return type as the `task_sequence` object's associated
+Callable+ `f`. An asynchronous invocation of `f`, upon the end of its execution

> of `f`, will net a return value. At that point, that particular asynchronous

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with this term: "net a return value"; is this a typo?

Reviewer 2: Reworded

invocation is now considered to be complete, and the result of that invocation

> is now ready to be retrieved by a `get` call. Results from completed invocations
> are stored in a results data structure until the appropriate `get` call

Reviewer: singular/plural agreement:

```suggestion
is now ready to be retrieved by a `get` call. The result of each completed invocation
is stored in a results data structure until the appropriate `get` call
```

results and completion status to the results data structure of the task sequence
as long as the number of completed invocations in the results data structure is
less than `response_capacity`. When an invocation is able to write its result to
the results data structure, it can transition from an outstanding state to a
completed state. At least one outstanding `async` call will make progress as
long as the number of stored results is less than or equal to
`response_capacity`.

A default value is chosen by the implementation.
|===
--

=== Compatibility with FPGA Kernel Interface Properties

A `task_sequence` may be declared with the following FPGA Kernel Interface
properties:

 - `pipelined`
 - `stall_enable_clusters`
 - `stall_free_clusters`

These are described in the link:../proposed/sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties.asciidoc[
sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties] document.

Normally these properties are applicable only to kernels however this extension
supports applying the properties to task sequences.

== Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model

The progress guarantees for task threads are defined as follows:

>  - When a task sequence object _O_ is constructed, a task sequence object thread

Reviewer: If you give this a name now, you can be more concise below:

```suggestion
 - When a task sequence object _O_ is constructed, a task sequence object thread, _P_, 
```

 is also created.

 - At any point in time, the progress guarantee of all task sequence object
 threads created by a work-item _WI_ matches that of _WI_. For example,
 if _WI_ is strengthened to have a stronger progress guarantee than its
 initial guarantee, all of the task sequence object threads created by _WI_
 are also strengthened.

  - An `O.async(...)` call will result in creation of a task thread.
 `O.async(...)` can be called multiple times to create multiple task threads for
 _O_. A task thread has weakly parallel forward progress guarantee.

>  - Upon creation, a task sequence object thread _P_ immediately blocks on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Upon creation, _P_ immediately blocks on the
```

```
// A kernel K
{
  ...
  task_sequence<some_function, ...> task_obj1; // Object_1_Thread
  task_obj1.async(...); // Object_1_Task_1_Thread
  task_obj1.async(...); // Object_1_Task_2_Thread
  ...
  task_sequence<some_function, ...> task_obj2; // Object_2_Thread
  task_obj2.async(...); // Object_2_Task_1_Thread
  task_obj2.async(...); // Object_2_Task_2_Thread
}
```
The call to the task_sequence constructor creates the task object threads
_Object_1_Thread_ and _Object_2_Thread_. The first two `async` calls create task
threads _Object_1_Task_1_Thread_ and _Object_1_Task_2_Thread_. Similarly the
next two calls create _Object_2_Task_1_Thread_ and _Object_2_Task_2_Thread_.

The table below provides a view of the hierarchy of task threads that will be
generated.

.Hierarchy of task threads.
[cols="s,,,,"]
|=====
// row 1, cells 2 spans 4 cells hence the '4+' before '|'
| Work Item 4+^| _WI_
// row 2, cells after the first one span 2 cells each
|Task Sequence Object Thread
2+^|_Object_1_Thread_
2+^| _Object_2_Thread_
// row 3
| Task Thread
^| _Task_1_1_
^|__Task_1_2__
^|_Task_2_1_
^|_Task_2_2_
|=====

At some initial stage, all task threads have weakly parallel forward progress

> guarantee. If _K_ is strengthened to have concurrent forward progress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
guarantee. If _WI_ is strengthened to have concurrent forward progress
```

guarantee, then all of the object threads are also strengthened. Next, in this
example one task thread for each task sequence is also strengthened. This is
depicted in the table below (progress guarantee for each thread is in
parenthesis):

.Possible Progress Guarantees at some time after _WI_ is strengthened.
[cols="s,,,,"]
|=====
// row 1, cells 2 spans 4 cells hence the '4+' before '|'
| Work Item

> 4+^| _WI_ (concurrently parallel)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4+^| _WI_ (concurrent)
```

// row 2, cells after the first one span 2 cells each
|Task Sequence Object Thread
2+^|_Object_1_Thread_ (concurrent)
2+^| _Object_2_Thread_ (concurrent)
// row 3
| Task Thread
^| _Task_1_1_ (weakly parallel)
^|__Task_1_2__ (concurrent)
^|_Task_2_1_ (concurrent)
^|_Task_2_2_ (weakly parallel)
|=====

The next example shows how a task thread delegates its progress
guarantee to another task thread:

Assume that we have a task sequence object _TS_ templated on the function `f`
with `response_capacity` of 1 and `invocation_capacity` of 5. Four `async` calls

> create the following task threads: _T1_, _T2_, _T3_ and _T4_, for _TS_. _T1_ has

Reviewer: I want to emphasize that there's no guarantee that the first asynched thread is the one that will get strengthened.  

```suggestion
create the following task threads: _T1_, _T2_, _T3_ and _T4_, for _TS_. Say _T1_ has
```

Reviewer 2: Is it obvious from earlier descriptions that the order of strengthening of the threads in no way affects the order of retrieving the results?

Reviewer: Good catch.  I don't think it is obvious.  See my comment about response_capacity for more details.

concurrent forward progress guarantee after getting strengthened, while _T2_,
_T3_ and _T4_ have weakly parallel forward progress guarantees. The task threads
go through the following execution flow:

 - _T1_ finishes executing the function `f` associated with _TS_.

 - For _TS_, the output data structure _D_ can store the output of only one
 task thread since `response_capacity` is one. _T1_ writes its output.

 - Any task thread can now be picked to be strengthened to have concurrent
 forward progress guarantee. Let's say _T2_ is picked.

 - At some point _T2_ finishes executing `f`. _T1_'s results are still in the
 output data structure.

 - _T2_ cannot write its results until space is available in _D_. Hence
 , none of the other task threads can be picked to be strengthened to the
 stronger progress guarantee.

 - `get` is invoked. _T1_'s results get removed from _D_.

 - _T2_ can write its results and some other task thread can be picked to be
 strengthened.

> === Memory Order Semantics

Reviewer: You've dropped the scoping that was present in the SPIR-V spec.  I don't think this is safe as this is a stronger wording than the SPIR-V we want to lower it to.

Reviewer 2: Added

== Contributors

// spell-checker: disable
Jessica Davies, Intel +
Joe Garvey, Intel +
Robert Ho, Intel +
Tommy Hoffner, Intel +
Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel +
Michael Kinsner, Intel +
Abhishek Tiwari, Intel
// spell-checker: enable

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 6 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extension:

* link:./sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

== Status

This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

== Backend support status

TODO: Figure out if we can define an aspect for clearer error messages.

This extension is currently implemented in {icpx} only for FPGA devices and

> only when using the Level Zero backend.  Attempting to use this extension in

Reviewer: This isn't true.  We support this extension through our OpenCL backend.

Reviewer 3: Updated to state as much, please see if the wording is okay.

kernels that run on other devices or backends may result in undefined
behavior.  Be aware that the compiler is not able to issue a diagnostic to
warn you if this happens.

== Overview

Although SYCL supports task-level parallelism through device kernels, there is
no specific mechanism to express parallelism at a sub-kernel level or to invoke
additional kernels without involving the host program. In OpenCL 2.0 and beyond,
kernel invocations can be initiated without host program interaction through

> device side enqueue. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level

Reviewer: The term "device side enqueue" doesn't appear in the OpenCL 2.0 spec; I think it's just an informal term that a lot of OpenCL people use.  I think we should probably refer to the specific API call, enqueue_kernel, instead to be clear.

Reviewer 3: Updated.

parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial
compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to
spatial instances in the hardware.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for
use in device code. It provides the class
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller, and with which a clear mapping to
spatial hardware instances can be reasoned about when developing applications.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

=== Examples

> Here's an example that shows how to define and call two task sequences.

Reviewer: The amount of boilerplate in this code sample distracts from its purpose.  Can you show less host code or use USM + queue::single_task to shorten it?

Reviewer 3: Updated to use USM pointer for writing the output.

  task_sequence &operator=(const task_sequence &) = delete;
  task_sequence(task_sequence &&) = delete;
  task_sequence &operator=(task_sequence &&) = delete;

  task_sequence();

  task_sequence(const propertiesT &);

  void async(ArgsT... args);

  ReturnT get();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr bool has_property();
  
  template <typename propertyT>
  static constexpr auto get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
};

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
+Callable+ `f` and by a list of properties `propertiesT`.
The +Callable+ `f` defines the asynchronous task to be
associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring an auto reference ensures
that each `f` be statically resolvable at compile time.  Static resolvability by
the compiler is desirable when compiling for spatial architectures as it can
enable the generation of more efficient hardware. Furthermore, the partial
specialization `typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...)`
ensures that the return type `ReturnT` of `f` and the argument types

> `typename ... ArgsT` of `f` are resolvable and fixed for each definition of

Reviewer: Isn't this already guaranteed by templating on an auto reference?  For example, if you didn't have the partial specialization and you tried to declare a task_sequence object templated on an overloaded function, you'd get a compiler error because the type of f couldn't be deduced (proof: https://godbolt.org/z/K8zo67Y5W).  It seems to be that the partial specialization is for our convenience to make writing the class easier and not to enforce an additional constraint on the caller.

Reviewer 3: Updated to say that it makes it easier to write the class - although I think this should be an implementation detail and not mentioned in the spec at all. Do you agree?

`task_sequence`. 

The `task_sequence` interface consists of two member functions, `async` and
`get`. The `async` function asynchronously invokes `f`, and stores the return
value into a FIFO queue upon completion of `f`. By calling async on a
`task_sequence` more than once, the user implies that the invocations of `f` can

> be run in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be run in parallel, although the implementation is by no means obligated to do so.  
```

> The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it returns before the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it may return before the
```

or `get` on a different device results in undefined behavior.

[frame="topbot",options="header"]
|===
|Functions |Description
// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
task_sequence(const propertyListT &);

task_sequence();
----
|
Constructor for `task_sequence`. 

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
void async(ArgsT... args);
----
|
Asynchronously calls +f+ with +args+. 

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
ReturnT get();
----
|
Synchronously retrieves the result of an `async` call. 

Results are retrieved in FIFO order of their `async` invocations. 

// --- ROW BREAK ---
a|
[source,c++]
----
~task_sequence();
----
|
Destructor for `task_sequence`. 

Implicitly invokes `get` on all outstanding invocations launched through `async
unless this `task_sequence` object was instantiated with the `balanced` property
defined below.
|===

=== `task_sequence` Scoping

To allow compilers targeting spatial compute architectures to efficiently reuse
hardware, `task_sequence` objects must not have their lifetime extended beyond
the scope in which they are declared, and it is undefined behavior if lifetime

> is otherwise extended. Both move and copy constructors for `task_sequence` are

Reviewer: How would this be accomplished?  If it's not possible given the API then we don't even need to say that it's UB.

Reviewer: I'm considering the case where you forget to call "get()" on a task_sequence that you've marked 'balanced' as a case of accessing an object that has gone out of scope, which is already illegal in C++, as opposed to a case of extending the lifetime of the object.

Reviewer 3: Removed. Maybe it was written this way just to explain why move, copy ctors have been deleted.

template <> struct is_property_key<invocation_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<invocation_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

template <uint32_t Size>
inline constexpr response_capacity_key::value_t<Size> response_capacity;

template <> struct is_property_key<response_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<response_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace intel
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler
that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked). 

| invocation_capacity | The `invocation_capacity` property defines the minimum

> required number `Size` of `async` invocations that must be invokable without any

Reviewer: This wording is confusing.  I think an earlier version may have stated this more clearly.  Something along these lines would be more readable:

The 'invocation_capacity' property defines the minimum number of 'async'd invocations that may be outstanding at any time without causing async calls to block.  An outstanding invocation is a call to async whose corresponding result has not yet been retrieved by a call to get().

Reviewer 3: Updated to say so.

`get` being called on that same set.  This number of `async` invocations without
a `get` call is the minimum number that will be supported before the `async`
member function blocks.

| response_capacity | The `response_capacity` property defines the maximum
number `Size` of outstanding `async` invocations such that all outstanding

> invocations are guaranteed to make forward progress. Further `async` invocations

Reviewer: I think the guarantee we can provide the user when they give us a response capacity is weaker than this.  For example, in our FPGA hardware, if an earlier invocations stalls it can block later invocations, thereby preventing them from making forward progress.  The only guarantee we are giving here is that at least one of the outstanding invocations can make progress if the number of outstanding invocations is less than response capacity.  This is analogous to the concept of blocking with forward progress guarantee delegation from the C++ spec.

Reviewer 3: I am now using the wording based on an earlier suggestion of yours:
```
Given a response capacity of `N`, the user is guaranteed that up to `N` outstanding calls can make progress.
```
Is this acceptable or would you prefer we re-word this to say 'at least one is guaranteed to make progress'?

Reviewer: At least one

Reviewer 3: Updated

beyond `Size` may block until enough `get` calls are invoked such that the

> number of outstanding `async` invocations is reduced to `Size`.

Reviewer: It's misleading and distracting to refer to calls to 'async' here.  This control isn't about how many outstanding calls you can have before async blocks, that's what invocation_capacity is for.  This control is about how many outstanding calls you can have before you can't be sure that _any_ of them will make forward progress.  I think this example will clarify:

```
use some_pipe::pipe<bool>; 

void foo() {
  some_pipe::write(true);
}

task_sequence<foo, decltype(properties{invocation_capacity<N>, response_capacity<M>})> f;
// N (invocation_capacity) determines the maximum value of num_async
// i.e. num_async <= N to ensure that the call to f::async() doesn't block
for (int i = 0; i < num_async; ++i) {
  f::async();
}
for (int i = 0; i < num_async; i+=block_size) {
  // M (response_capacity) determines the maximum value of block_size
  // i.e. block_size <= M to ensure that the call to some_pipe::read() doesn't block
  for (int j = 0; j < block_size; ++j) {
    some_pipe::read();
  }
  for (int j = 0; j < block_size; ++j) {
    f::get();
  }
}
```

Reviewer 3: The updated wording does not mention asyncs.

|===
--

=== Compatibility with FPGA Kernel Interface Properties

The `task_sequence` may be declared with the FPGA Kernel Interface `pipelined`
property described in link:sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties].

Reviewer: This interaction should probably be mentioned in the dependencies section as well.

Reviewer 3: Added.

Reviewer: This has not yet been addressed and it's the wrong extension name.

Reviewer: This link is still dead.

Reviewer 2: links work now.

> Normally the `pipelined` property is applicable only on kernels however this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally the `pipelined` property is applicable only to kernels however this
```

> extension supports applying the property on task sequences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension supports applying the property to task sequences.
```

== Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model

C{plus}{plus} defines a framework for describing the
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress[forward progress] of individual threads
with respect to one another in a multi-threaded program. 

Applying this framework to `task_sequence`, `async` tasks belonging to the same
`task_sequence` object provide a http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#11[
weakly parallel forward progress guarantee]. That is, tasks belonging to a
`task_sequence` object are not guaranteed to make forward progress with respect
to each other. 

Tasks belonging to different `task_sequence` objects provide a
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee]
with respect to each other. That is, tasks belonging to different
`task_sequence` objects are guaranteed to make forward progress with respect to
each other once they have been initiated.

Tasks belonging to a `task_sequence` object provide a
http://eel.is/c++draft/intro.progress#9[parallel forward progress guarantee]
with respect to their caller. That is, a `task_sequence`'s tasks are guaranteed
to make forward progress with respect to their caller (that invoked `async`).

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add to this section what I mentioned above about how threads block with forward progress guarantee delegation so long as the number of outstanding asyncs is less than response capacity.

Reviewer 3: Added.

the `enqueue_kernel` API. C++11 also introduced `std::async()` for task-level
parallelism. However, neither of these approaches is a good fit for spatial
compute platforms, which require a clear mapping of parallel constructs to
spatial instances in the hardware.

Rather than significantly changing the semantics of existing solutions, this
extension introduces a sub-kernel task-level parallelism interface to SYCL for
use in device code. It provides the class
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`, which is an
abstraction of an asynchronous sequence of invocations of a callable that can be
executed asynchronously from the caller. A single object of this class can map
naturally to a single hardware instance on spatial targets.

NOTE: In this document, we use `task_sequence` to indicate the proposed
`sycl::ext::intel::experimental::task_sequence`

=== Examples

Here's an example that shows how to define and call two task sequences.

```c++
using namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental;

// Return the sum of elements in 'v', from index 's' to 's+sz'
int vectorSum(float *v, size_t s, size_t sz) {
  ...
}

> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int main() {
```

Or just replace the line with "..."

...

  sycl::queue q{...};

  constexpr int kCount = ...;
  float* in = sycl::malloc_host<float>(kCount, q);
  float* out = sycl::malloc_host<float>(1, q);
  ...

  q.single_task([=] {

>     task_sequence<vectorSum> firstHalf;

Reviewer 3: I feel that the existing API is more clear - each task sequence object represents the logic that executes on the FPGA and each async is a thread that can be enqueued to that logic block. If we template the async on the function to be executed then this mapping seems less clear.
I'll let Johnny comment on what such a model change would imply for the implementation.

>     task_sequence<vectorSum> firstHalf;

Reviewer 2: I don't think this would work, this would not convey as clearly that vectorSum is going to be instantiated as a hardware instance on the FPGA. There's no clear construct that a task_sequence, without any templated function, maps to on the FPGA, so the declaration `task_sequence ts;` doesn't make sense.

>     task_sequence<vectorSum> firstHalf;

Reviewer 8: Thanks both for the explanation, I see why it makes sense to specify the function as a template parameter of `task_sequence`.

    task_sequence<vectorSum> secondHalf;
    constexpr int halfCount = kCount/2;

>     firstHalf.async(in, 0, halfCount);

Reviewer 3: We'd also have to submit the task function to the free function. Do you know what motivated this change in direction?

>     firstHalf.async(in, 0, halfCount);

Reviewer 8: So C++ has generally been moving towards favouring free functions over member functions in many cases, the main motivators are that it de-couples the class from the function, allowing it to be more extensible since the same function can be overloaded for multiple types (existing and future), and also as it better supports ADL.

We did this in SYCL 2020 for group functions, so that the same function can be called with any "group type", and we're considering a similar approach for functions like 'submit` and `'parallel_for` (https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc).

The reason I suggest it here is that for an interface like this where we are launching a function from the kernel, the `task_sequence` is effectively a kind of executor or scheduler type, and it could be nice to extend this in the future to support other types.

  void async(__unspecified__... args);

  __unspecified__ get();

  template<typename propertyT>
  static constexpr bool has_property();

  // The return type is an unspecified internal class used to represent
  // instances of propertyT
  template<typename propertyT>
  static constexpr /*unspecified*/ get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
}

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
Callable `f`, and a list of properties _PropertyListT_. The Callable `f` defines
the asynchronous task to be associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring
an auto reference ensures that each `f` is statically resolvable at compile
time. Static resolvability by the compiler is desirable when compiling for
spatial architectures as it can enable the generation of more efficient
hardware. Templating a task_sequence on a non-Callable is malformed.
_PropertyListT_ enables properties to be associated with a `task_sequence`

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Member functions of the `task_sequence` class|Description

|void async(\\__unspecified__... args)
|Available only in device functions. +
 +

>  Asynchronously invoke the task_sequence's associated Callable `f` with `args`

Reviewer 2: added

 Calling `async` on a task_sequence with mismatched argument types with respect
 to the Callable `f`'s argument types is malformed.

> |\\__unspecified__ get()

Reviewer 2: C++ std::async returns a handle that you'd just call handle::get() on to block and retrieve the results. I don't think this concept works differently for a task_sequence, and storing multiple results does not affect which result gets retrieved. 
i.e. The first get() call retrieves the results of the first async() call. The second get() call retrieves the results of the second async() call, etc.

task_sequence as a construct mapped to hardware is like a unique hardware instance for each templated task function. Wherever this task_sequence is in scope, async() and get() can be called if calculation is needed on a sidepath such that it does not stall the main datapath.

> |\\__unspecified__ get()

Reviewer 8: Ah okay so this is aiming to align with the C++ `std::async`, in that case I think it makes sense to keep the name as it is, and thanks for the explanation of how this is mapped to hardware.

A thought, if we're looking to map to `std::async` perhaps if we were to use a SYCL future type here it would make it clearer that `get` performs a similar function to the `std::future::get`. So `task_sequence::async` would return a `sycl::future<T>` where `T` is the return type of the function, and then `sycl::future::get` would return the value associated with the invocation of the function. Implementation-wise `sycl::future` would have a reference to the `task_sequence` and an index into the stack of return values so it can look up the right value.

This would change the semantics a little from what is proposed here but I think it would align even closer with `std::async`.

> |\\__unspecified__ get()

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is meant to align very closely/exactly with std::async, as we do not currently want to give users the ability to call get() out-of-order relative to the order that they called async, as that may required complicated synchronization hardware to block on get calls until the correct result is available, and then kind of short-circuit that result out of the results data structure so it gets past any potential completedinvocations that were launched before it (in async order) and are waiting in the results data structure.

|===

By calling `async` on a `task_sequence` object more than once, the user implies
that those invocations of `f` can be run in parallel. The implementation is,
however, not obligated to run the invocations in parallel except in so far as is
necessary to meet the forward progress guarantees outlined in the section on
Progress Guarantees.

The `async` function call is non-blocking in that it may return before the
asynchronous `f` invocation completes executing, and potentially before `f` even
begins executing (return from the `async` provides no implicit information on
the execution status of `f`).

An asynchronous invocation of `f`, upon the end of its execution of `f`, will
produce a result. At that point, that particular asynchronous invocation is now
considered to be complete, and the result of that invocation is now ready to be
retrieved by a `get` call. The result of each completed invocation is stored in
a results data structure until the appropriate `get` call retrieves it. This
results data structure will keep the results in the same order in which their
corresponding `async` invocations were invoked. The `get` call retrieves results

> from this results data structure. The `get` call blocks if there is no result to
> retrieve.

Reviewer: I worry that with the current wording someone might still think that results can be returned out of order so long as the earlier asyncs haven't completed yet, i.e. that only those asyncs that are done are ordered.  I think we could clarify by saying:

```suggestion
from this results data structure. The `get` call blocks if the result for the oldest 'async' is not in the results data structure.  
```

Reviewer: Now that I think about it more, I think this might be indicative of a bigger problem.  With the way we currently define the behaviour of the results data structure and our forward progress guarantees, I worry that a user has to size their results data structure equal to their maximum number of outstanding invocations (i.e. their invocation_capacity) if they want to guarantee no hangs which is not our intent.  Consider this case:

-invocation_capacity of 2
-response capacity of 1
Code:
```
task_sequence<...> t;
t.async();
t.async();
t.get();

The get() must return the result of the first async.  Let's say the 2nd thread get strengthened to have a concurrent forward progress guarantee.  When it completes, it stores its result in the results data structure, taking up the one slot available based on a response capacity of 1 and delegates its forward progress guarantee to the first thread.  The first thread completes but can't store its result into the results data structure because it's full.  As a result the get() never returns because it needs the result from that first thread.  

I think to get out of this mess we may need to tweak the definition of response_capacity slightly to indicate that a response_capacity of N means you must have sufficient capacity that the _oldest outstanding N invocations_ can fit in the results data structure.  

Such a definition would require implementations to either:
1. Keep invocations in order if they only want to use a capacity of N
2. If they want to allow invocations to get out of order they'd have to add extra capacity to account for the maximum amount of out-of-orderness they allowed.

Reviewer 2: I've changed the wording of response capacity to reflect your first comment for now. Awaiting Abhishek's opinions.

Reviewer 3: I like the idea of removing the ordering guarantee and simplifying the spec

Reviewer 2: I think we are going to stick with guaranteed return order for now to ensure emulator and simulator behaviour match, with the option to add a property later on to allow for out of order returns.

until all invocations are completed. The exception to this case is if the
`balanced` property was specified, in which case it is the programmer's
responsibility to ensure that corresponding `get` has been called for all
invocations launched using `async` before the lifetime of the `task_sequence`
object ends.

It is expected that many common coding patterns will guarantee that the number
of `async` and `get` calls match (are balanced) before a `task_sequence` object
is destroyed. To provide more information to the compiler and to relax the
requirement for `get` to be invoked implicitly, the property `balanced` may be
specified on a `task_sequence` object, which guarantees that a user will not
allow a destructor on that `task_sequence` object to be called when there are
outstanding `async` invocations that have not been balanced by a matching `get`
call. On spatial architectures, in the presence of this property, potentially
expensive hardware may be elided. It is undefined behavior to specify the
`balanced` property on `task_sequence` and then to allow the `task_sequence`
object to be destroyed while there are any `async` invocations for which `get`

> has not been called.

Reviewer: The end of the first paragraph and the beginning of the second are redundant.

Reviewer 2: removed

template <> struct is_property_key<response_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<balanced_key, task_sequence<f, PropertyListT>>
  : std::true_type {};
template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<invocation_capacity_key, task_sequence<f, PropertyListT>>
  : std::true_type {};
template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<response_capacity_key, task_sequence<f, propertiesT>>
  : std::true_type {};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler
that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked).

| invocation_capacity | The `async` invocations are guaranteed to not block the
caller as long as the number of outstanding invocations are less than or equal
to `invocation_capacity`. An outstanding invocation is an inflight
`task_sequence` invocation that has not yet completed.

> A default value is chosen by the implementation.

Reviewer 2: This is a compile time property that sets the depth of the generated hardware FIFOs on the FPGA to accommodate extra async'ed invocations and results ready for retrieval, so users would already know if they need to add any of these capacities as properties, or if they don't care about them. A user wouldn't use a query of this value to decide different kinds of hardware to generate unless they already knew the performance impacts that different capacities would have, in which case they would have already specified the property with a compile time argument and used that to decide what upstream/downstream hardware to instantiate instead of relying on the default value of the implementation.

> A default value is chosen by the implementation.

Reviewer 8: Thanks for explanation, I guess I wasn't thinking about having a query for deciding whether to use a particular hardware, it was more to handle the case where a user needs to decide whether the number of `async`/`get` calls they are making will exceed the default limit and would therefore need to specify these properties. I guess this information could be provided by the hardware documentation, but perhaps having a query could allow users to adapt the implementation dynamically.

| response_capacity | A `task_sequence` invocation is allowed to write its
results and completion status to the results data structure of the

> `task_sequence` if there is sufficient capacity to accommodate it. A
> `response_capacity` of N indicates the minimum capacity required for the results
> data structure such that the oldest N invocations of the `task_sequence` can be
> successfully written to the results data structure. When an invocation is able

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't make sense as it's a circular definition.  I think you meant to say:

```suggestion
`task_sequence` if there is sufficient capacity to accommodate it. A
`response_capacity` of N indicates that the results
data structure should be sized such that the oldest N invocations of the `task_sequence` can be
successfully written to the results data structure. When an invocation is able
```

will make progress as long as the results data structure is not full.

A default value is chosen by the implementation.
|===
--

=== Compatibility with FPGA Kernel Interface Properties

A `task_sequence` may also be declared with the following FPGA Kernel Interface
properties:

 - `pipelined`
 - `fpga_cluster`

These are described in the link:../proposed/sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties.asciidoc[
sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties] document.

Normally these properties are applicable only to kernels however this extension
supports applying the properties to task sequences.

== Forward Progress Guarantees and Execution Model

The progress guarantees for task threads are defined as follows:

 - When a `task_sequence` object _O_ is constructed, a `task_sequence` object
 thread _P_, is also created.

 - At any point in time, the progress guarantee of all `task_sequence` object
 threads created by a work-item _WI_ matches that of _WI_. For example,
 if _WI_ is strengthened to have a stronger progress guarantee than its
 initial guarantee, all of the `task_sequence` object threads created by _WI_
 are also strengthened.

>   - An `O.async(...)` call will result in creation of a task thread.

Reviewer 3: We created a model here just to illustrate the expected guarantees of the task sequence threads. In an actual implementation a thread need not be created when a task sequence is constructed, only when the tasks are asynced

>   - An `O.async(...)` call will result in creation of a task thread.

Reviewer 8: Okay thanks for the explanation, does this mean that the thread _P_ could be a separate thread which blocks for the object threads or the thread which calls `get`?

Perhaps this wording should say `object thread _P_, may be created`?

>   - An `O.async(...)` call will result in creation of a task thread.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if that's right, because it is through the creation of this abstract thread _P_ by which forward progress guarantee delegation. This is what allows a task thread (once created) to have its progress guarantee strengthened. This delegation and strengthening is isolated to each task object, therefore a separation between work item and task has to be present to facilitate this, hence why "_P_ is created" instead of "_P_ may be created".

with `response_capacity` of 1 and `invocation_capacity` of 5. Four `async` calls
create the following task threads: _T1_, _T2_, _T3_ and _T4_, for _TS_. Say _T1_
has concurrent forward progress guarantee after getting strengthened, while
_T2_, _T3_ and _T4_ have weakly parallel forward progress guarantees. The task
threads go through the following execution flow:

 - _T1_ finishes executing the function `f` associated with _TS_.

 - For _TS_, the output data structure _D_ can store the output of only one
 task thread since `response_capacity` is one. _T1_ writes its output.

 - Any task thread can now be picked to be strengthened to have concurrent
 forward progress guarantee. Let's say _T2_ is picked.

 - At some point _T2_ finishes executing `f`. _T1_'s results are still in the
 output data structure.

 - _T2_ cannot write its results until space is available in _D_. Hence
 , none of the other task threads can be picked to be strengthened to the
 stronger progress guarantee.

 - `get` is invoked. _T1_'s results get removed from _D_.

 - _T2_ can write its results and some other task thread can be picked to be
 strengthened.

> === Memory Order Semantics

Reviewer: Should we add a motivating sentence here along the lines of:

> These rules were chosen to provide the same guarantees as std::thread and match most programmer's intuition about how launching new threads should behave.

> - `async` is a *Release* operation scoped to include the kernel/task function

Reviewer 2: reworded

> - `async`` is a *Release* operation scoped to include the kernel/task function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `async` is a *Release* operation scoped to include the kernel/task function
```

  // The return type is an unspecified internal class used to represent
  // instances of propertyT
  template<typename propertyT>
  static constexpr /*unspecified*/ get_property();

  ~task_sequence();
}

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental

----

`task_sequence` is a class template, parameterized by an `auto` reference to a
Callable `f`, and a list of properties _PropertyListT_. The Callable `f` defines
the asynchronous task to be associated with the `task_sequence`, and requiring
an auto reference ensures that each `f` is statically resolvable at compile
time. Static resolvability by the compiler is desirable when compiling for
spatial architectures as it can enable the generation of more efficient
hardware. Templating a task_sequence on a non-Callable is malformed.
_PropertyListT_ enables properties to be associated with a `task_sequence`

[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Member functions of the `task_sequence` class|Description

|void async(\\__unspecified__... args)
|Available only in device functions. +
 +
 Asynchronously invoke the task_sequence's associated Callable `f` with `args`.
 Calling `async` on a task_sequence to start a new invocation may block if the

>  number of outstanding invocations is equal to the invocation capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 number of outstanding invocations is greater than or equal to the invocation capacity.
```

 Calling `async` on a task_sequence with mismatched argument types with respect

>  to the Callable `f`'s argument types is malformed.

Reviewer: This isn't formatting as intended

|\\__unspecified__ get()
|Available only in device functions. +
 +
 Retrieves a return value from the task_sequence, which is the same return type

>  as the associated Callable `f`'s return type. Calling `get` on a task_sequence

Reviewer: This is not formatting as intended.

 to retrieve a return value from the task_sequence will block if there are no
 return values to retrieve.
|===

By calling `async` on a `task_sequence` object more than once, the user implies
that those invocations of `f` can be run in parallel. The implementation is,
however, not obligated to run the invocations in parallel except in so far as is
necessary to meet the forward progress guarantees outlined in the section on
Progress Guarantees. It is undefined behaviour to template a task sequence
object on a function and rely on communication between different invocations,

> i.e. through the use of atomics in the function.

Reviewer: This is confusing.  First this part "to template a task sequence object on a function" is totally unnecessary as that's always how you use a task_sequence.  Secondly, why would it be UB to communicate between invocations?  So long as you use atomics and are cognizant of the forward progress guarantees it seems like a totally reasonable thing to do.

template <> struct is_property_key<invocation_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};
template <> struct is_property_key<response_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<balanced_key, task_sequence<f, PropertyListT>>
  : std::true_type {};
template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<invocation_capacity_key, task_sequence<f, PropertyListT>>
  : std::true_type {};
template <auto &f, typename PropertyListT>
struct is_property_key_of<response_capacity_key, task_sequence<f, propertiesT>>
  : std::true_type {};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler
that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked).

| invocation_capacity | The `async` invocations are guaranteed to not block the
caller as long as the number of outstanding invocations are less than or equal
to `invocation_capacity`. An outstanding invocation is an inflight

> `task_sequence` invocation that has not yet completed.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be:
```suggestion
`task_sequence` invocation that has not yet had get() called on it.
```
As worded it sounds like it only requires f() to have completed execution, meaning that you must physically use an infinitely large FIFO to store asynced calls, which would defeat the point on the invocation_capacity property.

A default value is chosen by the implementation.

| response_capacity | A `task_sequence` invocation is allowed to write its
results and completion status to the results data structure of the
`task_sequence` if there is sufficient capacity to accommodate it. A
`response_capacity` of N indicates that the results
data structure should be sized such that the oldest N invocations of the `task_sequence` can be
successfully written to the results data structure. When an invocation is able
to write its result to the results data structure, it can transition from an

> outstanding state to a completed state. At least one outstanding `async` call

Reviewer: It seems the problematic definition of outstanding that I called out above is pervasive.  Perhaps we just shouldn't use the term "outstanding" in the definition of invocation capacity.

2+^| _Object_2_Thread_ (concurrent)
// row 3
| Task Thread
^| _Task_1_1_ (weakly parallel)
^| _Task_1_2_ (concurrent)
^| _Task_2_1_ (concurrent)
^| _Task_2_2_ (weakly parallel)
|=====

The next example shows how a task thread delegates its progress
guarantee to another task thread:

Assume that we have a task sequence object _TS_ templated on the function `f`
with `response_capacity` of 1 and `invocation_capacity` of 5. Four `async` calls
create the following task threads: _T1_, _T2_, _T3_ and _T4_, for _TS_. Say _T1_
has concurrent forward progress guarantee after getting strengthened, while
_T2_, _T3_ and _T4_ have weakly parallel forward progress guarantees. The task
threads go through the following execution flow:

 - _T1_ finishes executing the function `f` associated with _TS_.

 - For _TS_, the output data structure _D_ can store the output of only one
 task thread since `response_capacity` is one. _T1_ writes its output.

 - Any task thread can now be picked to be strengthened to have concurrent
 forward progress guarantee. Let's say _T2_ is picked.

 - At some point _T2_ finishes executing `f`. _T1_'s results are still in the
 output data structure.

>  - _T2_ cannot write its results until space is available in _D_. Hence
>  , none of the other task threads can be picked to be strengthened to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - _T2_ cannot write its results until space is available in _D_. Hence
, none of the other task threads can be picked to be strengthened to the
```

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<invocation_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

template <uint32_t Size>
inline constexpr response_capacity_key::value_t<Size> response_capacity;

template <> struct is_property_key<response_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<response_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler
that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked).

| invocation_capacity | The `async` invocations are guaranteed to not block
as long as the number of outstanding invocations are less than or equal to
`invocation_capacity`. An outstanding invocation is a call to `async` whose

> corresponding result has not yet been retrieved by a call to `get`.

Reviewer: This definition makes the distinction between invocation_capacity and get_capacity meaningless as one would always have to set them both to the maximum number of outstanding invocations.  It also differs from how we've defined this in the SPIR-V extension.  The definition we use there is that an outstanding invocation is one that has been asynched but has not yet completed.  The difference is that it doesn't have to have been geted before it is no longer considered outstanding.

Reviewer 2: I have reworded the description of async and response capacities, please take a look!

A default value is chosen by the implementation.

> | response_capacity | Given a response capacity of `N`, the user is guaranteed
> that at least one outstanding `async` call will make progress as long as the

Reviewer: "the user" here is unnecessarily indirect and thus awkward.  Can we simply say:

```suggestion
| response_capacity | Given a response capacity of `N`, at least one outstanding `async` call will make progress as long as the
```

Reviewer 2: Had to reword most of this

> number of outstanding invocations is less than or equal to `N`.

Reviewer: As above, this is not aligned with the SPIR-V spec and is not usefully different from invocation_capacity in its present state.  A definition that matches the SPIR-V spec would be to say that an outstanding async can make progress so long as the number of completed tasks that haven't yet been geted is less than or equal to 'N'.

Reviewer 2: I have reworded this section with a little more than what you mentioned here.

2+^|_Object_1_Thread_
2+^| _Object_2_Thread_
// row 3
| Task Thread
^| _Task_1_1_
^|__Task_1_2__
^|_Task_2_1_
^|_Task_2_2_
|=====

At some initial stage, all task threads have weakly parallel forward progress
guarantee. If _K_ is strengthened to have concurrent forward progress
guarantee, then all of the object threads are also strengthened. Next, in this
example one task thread for each task sequence is also strengthened. This is
depicted in the table below (progress guarantee for each thread is in
parenthesis):

.Possible Progress Guarantees at some time after _WI_ is strengthened.
[cols="s,,,,"]
|=====
// row 1, cells 2 spans 4 cells hence the '4+' before '|'
| Work Item
4+^| _WI_ (concurrently parallel)
// row 2, cells after the first one span 2 cells each
|Task Sequence Object Thread
2+^|_Object_1_Thread_ (concurrent)
2+^| _Object_2_Thread_ (concurrent)
// row 3
| Task Thread
^| _Task_1_1_ (weakly parallel)
^|__Task_1_2__ (concurrent)
^|_Task_2_1_ (concurrent)
^|_Task_2_2_ (weakly parallel)
|=====

The next example shows how a task thread delegates its progress
guarantee to another task thread:

Assume that we have a task sequence object _TS_ templated on the function `f`

> with `response_capacity` of 1 and `invocation_capacity` of 5. Four `async` calls

Reviewer: Does a response_capacity smaller than invocation_capacity make sense?  If you launch more tasks than your response_capacity, none of them are guaranteed to make progress, so how can you be sure the program will ever terminate?

Reviewer 2: I think it could potentially make sense for a scenario where a task sequence may have multiple `async` invocations in flight (i.e. input data gets split into multiple parts, call `task_sequence.async` on each part, input data arrives periodically on some schedule). The task itself takes relatively long to complete, but upon completion, the caller is cleaning them up one after another (for loop of X `get` calls). Kernel needs high async capacity to launch invocations immediately without blocking (so it can go on to do other work), but doesn't expect more async calls to happen until after it has collected all current results. During the period when the kernel has not called `get` and the task has invocation 1 stored in results and invocation 2 ready to store in results, invocation 3 is not strengthened and thus will not make progress. That would be the intended behaviour until the kernel calls get, after which invocation 1 results are retrieved, invocation 2 writes its result and is marked completed, and invocation 3 is strengthened and can make forward progress.

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<invocation_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

template <uint32_t Size>
inline constexpr response_capacity_key::value_t<Size> response_capacity;

template <> struct is_property_key<response_capacity_key> : std::true_type {};

template <typename ReturnT, typename ... ArgsT, ReturnT(&f) (ArgsT...),
  class propertiesT>
struct is_property_key_of<response_capacity_key,
  task_sequence<f, propertiesT>> : std::true_type {};

} // namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental
----

--
[options="header"]
|===
| Property | Description
| balanced | The `balanced` property is a guarantee to the SYCL device compiler
that the `task_sequence` object will call exactly the same number of `async` s
and `get` s over the object's lifetime (i.e. before the `task_sequence`
destructor is invoked).

| invocation_capacity | The `async` invocations are guaranteed to not block the
caller as long as the number of outstanding invocations are less than or equal
to `invocation_capacity`. An outstanding invocation is an inflight task sequence

> invocation that has not yet completed.

Reviewer: "completed" is also ambiguous.  Perhaps you need to define it above along with results data structure.

Reviewer 2: Described both in the section explaining what "get" does

A default value is chosen by the implementation.

| response_capacity | Any task sequence invocation is allowed to write its

> results and completion status to the results data structure of the task sequence

Reviewer: You're introducing the term "results data structure" for the first time here without defining it.  I think you need to define it somewhere.
